                                                                                                                             ADVERTISEMENT
  /                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                brought to you by
    NEWS CAREERS       COMMENTARY             JOURNALS
                                                            .         |        COVID-19                                                                                    University of East An…                                 LOG IN   BECOME A MEMBER
                                                                                     Current Issue      First release papers    Archive    About          Submit manuscript                                               GET OUR E-ALERTS
              HOME   ! SCIENCE ! VOL. 345, NO. 6194 ! GENOME INTERPLAY IN THE GRAIN TRANSCRIPTOME OF HEXAPLOID BREAD WHEAT
              !    | SPECIAL ISSUE RESEARCH ARTICLE
                                                                                                                                      "#$%                  󡀆   '             CURRENT ISSUE
              Genome interplay in the grain transcriptome of hexa-
              ploid bread wheat
              MATTHIAS PFEIFER, KARL G. KUGLER, SIMEN R. SANDVE, BUJIE ZHAN, HEIDI RUDI, TORGEIR R. HVIDSTEN, INTERNATIONAL WHEAT GENOME SEQUENCING CONSORTIUM,
              KLAUS F. X. MAYER, AND ODD-ARNE OLSEN     Authors Info & A1liations
              SCIENCE     18 Jul 2014  Vol 345, Issue 6194  DOI: 10.1126/science.1250091
                   731        190
                                                                                                                                         # $ ",
                  Abstract
-                                                                                                                                                            &
                  Allohexaploid bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) provides approximately 20% of
                                                                                                                                                             '
                  calories consumed by humans. Lack of genome sequence for the three homeolo-
                  gous and highly similar bread wheat genomes (A, B, and D) has impeded expres-                                                              (
                  sion analysis of the grain transcriptome. We used previously unknown genome in-                                                            )
                  formation to analyze the cell type–specific expression of homeologous genes in                                                                              LLPS of FXR1 drives spermiogenesis by activating
                  the developing wheat grain and identified distinct co-expression clusters reflect-                                                         *                translation of stored mRNAs
                  ing the spatiotemporal progression during endosperm development. We observed                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                              BY JUN-YAN KANG, ZE WEN, ET AL.
                  no global but cell type– and stage-dependent genome dominance, organization of
                                                                                                                                                             +                Prokaryotic innate immunity through pattern
                  the wheat genome into transcriptionally active chromosomal regions, and asym-                                                                               recognition of conserved viral proteins
                  metric expression in gene families related to baking quality. Our findings give in-                                                                         BY LINYI ALEX GAO, MAX E. WILKINSON, ET AL.
                  sight into the transcriptional dynamics and genome interplay among individual
                                                                                                                                                                              Deep-learning seismology
                  grain cell types in a polyploid cereal genome.
                                                                                                                                                                              BY S. MOSTAFA MOUSAVI, GREGORY C. BEROZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS    !
              The vast majority (90 to 95%) of wheat produced in the world is the allohexaploid
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ADVERTISEMENT
              bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L., 2n = 6x = 42, AABBDD) accounting for ~20% of calo-
              ries consumed by humans worldwide. Because of global economic and social trends,
              wheat-processing industries put great emphasis on enhancing specific grain-quality
              attributes. However, an allopolyploid genome composition requires regulatory mecha-                                                                             LATEST NEWS
              nisms within the cell that can orchestrate the complex intergenomic gene expression
              through genetic or epigenetic modifications. This may result in genomic asymmetry                                                                               NEWS     11 AUG 2022
                                                                                                                                                                              News at a glance: South Korea’s lunar orbiter, the
              and favored expression of individual genes from specific, single genomes [reviewed in                                                                           U.S. monkeypox response, and a lost Earth-science
              (1)]. For allopolyploid wheat, partial or complete genome dominance has been indicat-                                                                           satellite
              ed as affecting traits such as grain size and form. However, the extent and characteris-
              tics of gene expression divergence between genomes in different tissues at the whole-                                                                           NEWS FEATURE       11 AUG 2022
                                                                                                                                                                              Are space scientists ready for Starship—the biggest
              genome level is largely unknown. The lack of a genome sequence for bread wheat that                                                                             rocket ever?
              could enable the measurement of A, B, and D genome-specific transcription has previ-
              ously hindered examination (2) of the genetic control of grain components (3, 4).                                                                               NEWS     11 AUG 2022
                                                                                                                                                                              Your simple throat is the reason you don’t sound like
                                                                                                                                                                              a chimp
              The global landscape of endosperm gene expression
                                                                                                                                                                              NEWS     11 AUG 2022
              We surveyed the genome-wide patterns of cell-type–specific gene expression, provid-
                                                                                                                                                                              Mentally exhausted? Study blames buildup of key
              ing detailed insights into the contributions of the A, B, and D genomes to the grain                                                                            chemical in brain
              transcriptome. The bread wheat endosperm is composed of three main cell types (Fig.
              1A) (5). The starchy endosperm (SE) accumulates starch and storage proteins and                                                                                 NEWS     10 AUG 2022
              forms the bulk of the grain. The aleurone layer (AL) is a single cell layer surrounding                                                                         Nearby star’s midlife crisis illuminates the future of
                                                                                                                                                                              our own Sun
              the SE, except on the ventral crease side, where transfer cells (TCs) develop. Aleurone
              cells accumulate lipids and play an essential role in grain germination, whereas the
                                                                                                                                                                              SCIENCEINSIDER      10 AUG 2022
              TCs actively transport sucrose from the photosynthetic tissues to the endosperm and                                                                             How effective is the monkeypox vaccine? Scientists
              embryo. We applied RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) in order to monitor gene expression in                                                                              scramble for clues as trials ramp up
              different cell types at three different developmental stages that reflect the progression
              of starch and storage protein accumulation [10, 20, or 30 days post anthesis (DPA)]
              (Fig. 1A). The International Wheat Genome Sequencing Consortium (IWGSC) bread                                                                                                           ADVERTISEMENT
              wheat genome survey sequence and annotation (6) were used as a reference, enabling
              assignment of the endosperm transcriptome to the three homeologous genomes A, B,
              and D and allowing the identification of previously unidentified transcripts and iso-
              forms (7).                                                                                                                                                      RELATED JOBS
                                                                                                                                                                              Postdoctoral Associate Position in RNA
                                                                                                                                                                              Turnover
                                                                                                                                                      % OPEN IN VIEWER        Rutgers University
                                                                                                                                                                              Piscataway, New Jersey
                                                                                                                                                                              Assistant Research Professor/Biostatistician -
                                                                                                                                                                              Radiation Oncology or Immune Effector Cell
                                                                                                                                                                              (Remote)
                                                                                                                                                                              City of Hope
                                                                                                                                                                              Duarte, California
                                                                                                                                                                              RNA Accelerator Postdoctoral Fellow
                                                                                                                                                                              BioMedicine Design
                                                                                                                                                                              P<zer
                                                                                                                                                                              Andover, Massachusetts
                                                                                                                                                                                MORE JOBS ▶
                                                                                                                                                                              RECOMMENDED
                                                                                                                                                                              RESEARCH ARTICLES       JULY 2014
                                                                                                                                                                              A chromosome-based draft sequence of the
                                                                                                                                                                              hexaploid bread wheat (Triticum aestivum) genome
                                                                                                                                                                              RESEARCH ARTICLES       JULY 2014
                                                                                                                                                                              Structural and functional partitioning of bread wheat
                                                                                                                                                                              chromosome 3B
              Fig. 1 Overview of the wheat endosperm transcriptome.                                                                                                           RESEARCH ARTICLES       AUGUST 2018
              (A) At 10 DPA, we sampled the whole endosperm (W). At 20 DPA, we also separated the SE, the AL, and the                                                         Shifting the limits in wheat research and breeding
              TC layer by means of manual dissection. At 30 DPA, the AL adheres tightly to the outermost SE cells, caus-                                                      using a fully annotated reference genome
              ing aleurone tissue to contain contamination from SE cells (ALSE). (B) The number of wheat genes ex-
              pressed (dark gray outside line) and not expressed (lighter gray outside line) in endosperm (all cell types
              and developmental stages), distributed across the three genomes (green, A; purple, B; orange, D). (C) The                                                       REPORTS      JULY 2017
              number of genes expressed (open bars) and preferentially expressed (solid bars) in each cell type and de-                                                       Wild emmer genome architecture and diversity
              velopmental stage. Genes are considered preferentially expressed in a sample if they are up-regulated in                                                        elucidate wheat evolution and domestication
              that sample as compared with the other samples. (D) Hierarchical clustering of gene expression similarities
              of the samples across all genes. Bootstrap values indicate the strength of the clustering [red, approximately
              unbiased (au) P value; green, bootstrap probability (bp) P value].
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ADVERTISEMENT
              In total, 46,487 out of 85,173 high-confidence (HC) wheat genes [55%; HC1 to HC3 (6)]
              were expressed during endosperm development (Fig. 1B), which is consistent with ob-
              servations in Arabidopsis thaliana and barley (8, 9). The number of genes from any
              genome preferentially expressed in individual cell types and developmental stages
              [up-regulated compared with the other samples (7)] varied substantially from 136 in
              TCs 20 DPA to 644 in AL cells 20 DPA (Fig. 1C). Genes that were preferentially ex-
              pressed in endosperm at 10 DPA were enriched for gene ontology (GO) (10) terms re-
              lated to carbohydrate metabolic processes and glycolysis (4, 9); AL-specific genes were
              enriched for lipid metabolism, structural development, carbohydrate metabolic pro-
              cesses, and amino acid biosynthesis (4); SE-specific genes were enriched for carbohy-
              drate and saccharide metabolism (11); and TC-specific genes were enriched for prote-
              olysis and defense-response genes (12). Low numbers of preferentially expressed genes
              in grain development have also been observed in A. thaliana (8). This suggests that
              there may be conserved regulatory principles across >100 million years of angiosperm
              evolution. Moreover, the three wheat genomes contribute about equally to the number
              of expressed genes in the endosperm as a whole (18 to 19%) (Fig. 1B) in each of the in-
              dividual cell types and developmental stages (Fig. 1C), as well as to the number of pref-
              erentially expressed genes in each cell type and stage (Fig. 1C).
              Morphologically, as well as functionally, aleurone and SE cells are widely different in
              that aleurone cells accumulate lipid bodies and are desiccation-tolerant, whereas SE
              cells accumulate starch granules and storage proteins and die toward grain maturation
              (13). The difference between aleurone cells and SE cells was also apparent from our
              whole-genome transcriptome analysis, in which aleurone cells exhibit a separate ex-
              pression cluster from all other samples (Fig. 1D). In addition, gene expression profiles
              related to the developmental stages were more similar than that of cell type–expres-
              sion patterns; samples from the 20-DPA stage cluster together (SE, TC, and W at 20
              DPA), whereas the clean SE sample from 30 DPA (SE at 30 DPA) and endosperm from
              10 DPA (W at 10 DPA) form separate clusters. Although TCs and SE cells are highly dif-
              ferent in that TCs have extended cell walls to facilitate sucrose transport, the TC sam-
              ple clustered with the SE samples, which most likely is due to tightly attached SE cells.
              Taken together, these observations fit with characterized endosperm cell function and
              the progression of endosperm development toward grain maturation (5, 13, 14).
              Spatiotemporal gene expression control
              Endosperm development progresses through four phases: the syncytial phase, the cel-
              lularization phase, the differentiation phase, and the maturation phase (13). We identi-
              fied one group of genes with spatiotemporal unspecific gene expression (cluster 0) and
              seven clusters of co-expressed genes (clusters I to VII) (Fig. 2). The latter reflected
              phases of endosperm differentiation and maturation, in which the industrially impor-
              tant characteristics of the wheat grain are developed. They contained from 2257 to
              5369 genes (24,826 in total) without evident genome dominance. Each cluster showed
              clear and distinct characteristics in terms of gene expression profiles, enrichments of
              preferentially expressed genes, and gene function enrichment (7). For example, cluster
              I exhibited increased expression in 10 DPA whole endosperm (W) when cell divisions
              were still occurring in the periphery of the endosperm and the transcription of storage
              proteins and the accumulation of starch had been initiated. Cluster II was expressed
              during the early differentiation phase, in which storage protein and starch accumula-
              tion reach their maximum. Cluster IV included a significant proportion of genes pref-
              erentially expressed in AL cells 20 DPA and was enriched for processes related to cat-
              alytic activity, lipid metabolic processes, and carbohydrate metabolism. The remaining
              clusters were characteristic for specific cell types (IV and VI, AL; III and VII, SE; and V,
              TCs) in the intermediate (III, IV, and V) and late phase (VI and VII).
                                                                                                                                                      % OPEN IN VIEWER
              Fig. 2 Spatiotemporal control of endosperm gene expression.
              Seven co-expression clusters (nodes I to VII) that span the phases of progression of starch and storage
              protein accumulation were identified with k-means clustering and spatially arranged so as to reflect the
              phases of maturation. For homeologous triplets, spatiotemporal differences of expression patterns be-
              tween individual (triplet) gene members were analyzed (7). Partitioning of expression for individual triplet
              genes was frequently observed (for example, homeologous A and B genome–encoded genes were located
              in cluster I, whereas the D genome copy clustered in cluster II). Bidirectional arrows connect pairs of clus-
              ters with a significant enrichment for expression partitioning among homeologous triplets. Assignment of
              different triplet members to different co-expression clusters is biased toward spatiotemporally related clus-
              ters (such as clusters IV and VI, late differentiation and maturation phase of aleurone cells). Gene expres-
              sion profiles across developmental stages and cell types of each cluster are visualized by use of boxplots.
              Boxes span the data range between the first and the third quartiles, and the median is represented as hori-
              zontal lines. Whiskers extend to the most extreme data point, which is no more than 1.5 times the interquar-
              tile range away from the first and the third quartile.
              We identified 6576 homeologous gene loci that had exactly one representative member
              from each genome (referred to as homeologous triplets; 6576 × 3 = 19,728 genes).
              Among these homeologous triplets, 5939 (88%) had at least one homeolog assigned to
              one of the co-expression clusters (7). We found that only 28% of the homeologous
              triplets (1663) had all three homeoalleles assigned to the same co-expression cluster.
              For 41% (2416) of the triplets, two out of three homeoalleles were assigned to the same
              co-expression cluster, whereas for the remaining 31% (1860), all homeoalleles fell in
              separate clusters. Co-expressed homeoalleles were uniformly distributed across
              genome pairs (A and B, 818 genes, 12%; A and D, 794 genes, 12%; B and D, 804 genes,
              12%) (7). Therefore, if major expression divergence between A and B homeologs oc-
              curred in the ancestral tetraploid, our data suggests that this expression divergence
              has been reprogrammed in the hexaploid genome. Clusters that are spatiotemporally
              related (for example, early and intermediate development) often shared significant
              numbers of homeoalleles from the same triplets, whereas functionally different co-ex-
              pression clusters only rarely did (one-sided Fisher’s exact test with Bonferroni adjust-
              ed P < 0.05) (Fig. 2). Analyzing homeologous genes with single copies in only two of
              the genomes gave similar results (7). Therefore, although there is apparent expression
              divergence among homeologs, most of this divergence is due to nonradical alterations
              in spatiotemporal expression. Thus sub-functionalization, rather than neo-functional-
              ization, appears to be occurring among the three bread wheat genomes.
              Endosperm cell type function and module-associated genome
              dominance in the grain transcriptional network
              We carried out analysis of genome-wide expression patterns of the homeologous
              triplets using principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering. Samples
              grouped according to genomes rather than cell types (7)—a finding that is consistent
              with observations of transcriptomes from different wheat organs (6). This result
              demonstrated that genome-specific gene expression dominates over tissue-specific
              gene expression also during endosperm development. To gain deeper insights into the
              transcriptional dynamics of homeologs, we inferred a co-expression network that was
              partitioned into 25 modules (Fig. 3A) (7). These transcriptional modules display differ-
              ent spatiotemporal characteristics, as revealed by integrating the information on gene
              expression at different developmental stages and in different cell types. We found spa-
              tiotemporal clustering of the network that separated cell types, but also a clustering of
              grain developmental stages (7). AL-related modules (Fig. 3A, left, turquoise nodes)
              formed a large cluster of genes that were expressed at 20 and 30 DPA and were en-
              riched for functions connected to, for example, energy metabolism, vitamin biosynthe-
              sis, and hydrolase activity. SE-related modules (Fig. 3A, left, red nodes) were more
              scattered and could be linked to, for example, polysaccharide catabolism, the glyoxy-
              late cycle, and autophagy. TCs (Fig. 3A, yellow nodes) formed dense, separated clusters
              enriched for “response to stimulus” functionality. Transcriptional modules enriched
              for more general functionalities (such as transport or translation) without cell type or
              developmental phase specificity were also found (Fig. 3A, gray nodes). In total, AL-re-
              lated modules constituted more than one third of the nodes (2207), whereas the other
              cell types contributed to a lesser extent (SE, 658 nodes, 11%; TC, 149 nodes, 2%). The
              remaining nodes grouped either with the early phase of endosperm development or
              unspecific clusters.
                                                                                                                                                      % OPEN IN VIEWER
              Fig. 3 Analysis of homeologous gene expression.
              (A) The dynamics of homeologous triplet gene expression patterns were captured in a co-expression net-
              work. Node coloring in the bottom central inset depicts the segmentation into 25 co-expression network
              modules. The inset denotes the network, with red circles around those modules that were significantly en-
              riched for hub genes. The transcriptional network is colored for cell type and developmental stage (left) and
              genome dominance (right) (7). Selected GO categories in the center exemplify the relationship between the
              spatiotemporal layer and genome asymmetry (green, A; purple, B; orange, D). (B) Significantly enriched bio-
              logical process GO categories were projected onto a two-dimensional semantic space (7, 16). Semantic
              representation of GO categories was colored according to the significant overrepresentation in co-expres-
              sion modules (green, A; purple, B; orange, D). Color intensity reflects significance of enrichment test, with
              dark colors corresponding to lower P values and white to P > 0.05. Circle radiuses depict the size of aggre-
              gated GO terms.
              We tested the transcriptional network for genome asymmetry. Different genomes dom-
              inated expression for 23 of the modules (92%), and no single genome proved to be
              overly dominant (Fig. 3A, right) (7). Highly connected genes in the network (hub
              genes) were significantly more likely to show a genome bias than were non-hub genes
              (one-sided Fisher’s exact test; P < 0.001). They were significantly enriched in modules
              that serve as connecting layers among different regions of the network (one-sided
              Fisher’s exact test; P < 0.001) (Fig. 3A, inset, highlighted red). Because hub genes dis-
              play characteristic expression profiles for network modules (15), our observations sug-
              gest that these genes might play an important role in orchestrating genome-specific
              expression in the grain transcriptome network.
              We superimposed the observed genome asymmetry to a semantic aggregation (16) of
              significantly overrepresented GO categories. Both general cellular functions as well as
              specific functions during bread wheat grain development were attributable to distinct
              contributions from individual genomes (Fig. 3B). These findings illustrate at least par-
              tial functional compartmentalization of the endosperm transcriptome among the
              three genomes.
              Sequence divergence analysis comparing homeologous gene pairs corroborated the
              hypothesis of homoploid hybrid speciation of the D genome lineage (7, 17). The num-
              bers of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site between A-D and B-D homeol-
              ogous genes were similar and significantly smaller than for homeologous gene pairs
              from the A and B genomes. Expression profiles of homeologs and expression domi-
              nance within the co-expression modules were independent of evolutionary history and
              relatedness (7). This suggests other genetic or epigenetic regulatory mechanisms as
              the cause of genome asymmetry (18–20).
              Regulation of endosperm gene expression linked to chromo-
              somal domains
              Although the regulation of gene expression is expected to affect genes at different loci
              in the genome, epigenetic mechanisms often influence neighboring genes (21). To in-
              vestigate the impact of chromosomal positioning of genes on mRNA abundance, we
              mapped 57,903 (67%) bread wheat genes to seven Triticeae prototype chromosomes (7)
              that reflect the inferred ancestral linear gene order in the A, B, and D genomes (22, 23).
              Along all chromosomes, the gene expression oscillated to form chromosomal domains
              (24, 25) with only minor divergence between the spatiotemporal endosperm conditions
              (Fig. 4A) (7). This spatial distribution of gene expression was to a large extent similar
              between genomes. However, we also observed chromosomal domains with asyn-
              chronous homeologous expression patterns, which indicates local genome asymmetry
              affecting neighboring genes (Fig. 4B). One of these domains (Fig. 4, blue rectangle)
              showed elevated gene expression in the D genome. We also found overrepresentation
              of differentially expressed homeologous triplets that were dominated by the D genome
              (Fisher’s exact test; P < 0.05), which excludes gene expression divergence because of
              variation in local gene content between genomes. Genes located in this chromosomal
              domain encoded proteins involved in basal cellular processes such as DNA packaging
              and transport activity. The genome-wide contribution of each genome appears to be
              balanced, but as well as genetic effects such as variation in gene copy number, there is
              local genome asymmetry for neighboring genes. This suggests that epigenetic regula-
              tory mechanisms act differently on particular corresponding domains of homeologous
              chromosomes.
                                                                                                                                                      % OPEN IN VIEWER
              Fig. 4 Local regulatory divergence at chromosomal domains.
              Distribution of gene expression in 20 DPA AL and 20 DPA SE was analyzed along Triticeae prototype (Tp)
              chromosome 1 by using a sliding window algorithm (sliding window, size 50 Tp loci and shift 10 Tp loci).
              (A) Line charts show the median gene expression measured in aleurone and SE cells at 20 DPA. We ob-
              served a strong correlation between the expression within chromosomal domains among the three
              genomes. However, in several cases a single genome dominates the expression at specific domains, such
              as in the region indicated by the rectangle. (B) Heat maps display the pairwise log2-fold changes in gene ex-
              pression for each window between genomes. Triangles indicate chromosomal regions that are significantly
              enriched for homeologous triplets up-regulated in a single genome (Fisher’s exact test; P < 0.05). In the
              marked area, the D genome expression strongly dominates, indicating at a chromosomal-specific regulation
              of expression.
              Copy number and homeologous expression in baking-quality
              genes
              Our data set enabled us to discriminate between transcripts from A, B, and D homeolo-
              gous genes and to identify genes encoding major protein families known to affect
              dough quality (7). Genes identified include the high- and low-molecular-weight
              glutenin genes (HMW-Glu and LMW-Glu); the α-, γ-, and ω-gliadins (Gli) (14); the
              grain-hardness locus genes encoding puroindoline A (pin-A) and puroindoline B (pin-
              B) (26); and last, the storage protein activators (SPAs) (Fig. 5A) (27). For both subunit
              types of glutenin genes, expression levels varied substantially, reflecting remarkable
              differences in the contribution of individual genomes to overall gene expression.
              Whereas the total gene expression of the LMW-Glu was dominated by the B genome
              (68%), genes of the D genome accounted for two thirds of the total expression of the
              HMW-Glu subunit. For genes of the A genome, we measured only marginal contribu-
              tion (2%), which supports the observed inactivation of Glu-A homeoalleles in hexa-
              ploid wheat (28, 29). We found dominance of the D genome in the wheat hardness lo-
              cus, including the pin-A and pin-B genes, which are exclusively encoded on the short
              arm of chromosome 5D (26, 30) and were expressed at high levels, as well as the three
              homeologous genes of the pin-B2 locus that were expressed at substantially lower lev-
              els (31). For the single-copy gene in each genome encoding the SPA (27), B genome
              expression strongly dominated over the expression of the A and the D homeologous
              gene copies. Although the B and the D genome copies were predominantly expressed
              at 10 DPA, the A genome–derived SPA allele was almost uniformly expressed at 10 DPA
              and in SE cells at 20 DPA. For the highly repetitive α-, γ-, and ω-gliadins (32–34), ex-
              pression levels varied substantially both in the number of genes and their expression
              levels between the A, B, and D genomes (Fig. 5B). Whereas gene copies of the B and D
              genome dominated total gene family expression, copies of the A genome accumulated
              fewer transcripts. For the α-gliadins, encoded on chromosome 6S, we found several
              gene copies for the A and B genomes, but strikingly, the entire α-Gli locus was absent
              from the D genome. Most likely, this lack was caused by a previously undescribed dele-
              tion of a small segment of chromosome 6DS (comprising ~200 genes) (Fig. 5C). We
              found the corresponding chromosomal region to be present in Aegilops tauschii, which
              suggests a partial chromosomal deletion that likely occurred after the hybridization
              event that formed hexaploid bread wheat.
                                                                                                                                                      % OPEN IN VIEWER
              Fig. 5 Genome asymmetry in gene families affecting baking quality.
              Gene family composition and gene expression was analyzed for major seed storage proteins affecting bak-
              ing quality of bread wheat. (A) Dendrograms depict phylogenetic trees for the SPA, low-molecular-weight
              glutenin subunit (LMW-Glu), high-molecular-weight glutenin subunit (HMW-Glu), and puroindoline (pin) A, B,
              and B-2 gene families. ψ indicates genes for which the predicted protein sequence is interrupted by prema-
              ture stop codons, frame shifts, or repetitive elements (putative pseudogenes). Heat maps depict relative
              spatiotemporal gene expression, and bar charts visualize the contribution of individual genes and genomes
              to the total expression measured for each gene family. (B) The bread wheat genome and gene annotation
              were surveyed for α-, γ-, and ω-gliadin genes (7). Coverage of query gliadin gene sequences is indicated by
              the connectors. Bar height in the outer circle indicates the relative contribution of all samples to the overall
              gene expression of the respective family. (C) Comparative analysis between Ae. tauschii and bread wheat
              revealed a previously undescribed deletion of a small segment on chromosome 6DS in bread wheat “Chi-
              nese Spring,” including the locus encoding the α-gliadins. Lines connect putative orthologous gene pairs of
              Ae. tauschii (41) and the three bread wheat genomes as ordered by IWGSC (6).
              For the inspected gene families, we found large genome-specific variation in the num-
              ber and abundance of genes, which implies the presence of genomic asymmetry and
              preferential expression of mostly the B and D genomes. Moreover, we observed dis-
              crepancies in genome expression dominance in the absence of homeologous counter-
              parts (α-Gli), potentially indicating trans-regulatory mechanisms and cross-talk be-
              tween genomes [discussed in (1)]. This comprehensive analysis of major grain-quality
              gene families in Chinese Spring, although not a wheat used for making bread, illus-
              trates the utility of measuring the number and expression levels of homologous genes
              in order to provide a complete picture of relevant genes for a trait under study. Valu-
              able information of associations between homeologous gene levels and traits of inter-
              est for wheat breeding, including baking quality, has to be learned from crosses be-
              tween appropriate genotypes. This asks for future experimentation, and our work and
              findings build an important foundation that allows monitoring similarities and differ-
              ences from genomic, transcriptional, and network-derived angles.
              Conclusions
              Our findings reveal the complex interplay in gene expression regulation during grain
              development in the hexaploid bread wheat at several levels. Genome autonomy, asym-
              metric contribution of genomes to particular functions, as well as indications for regu-
              lation of chromosomal domains were found. The study forms an important basis for
              addressing the inter- and intragenomic regulation within a polyploid genome. It en-
              ables studying the functional output in a wide range of wheat cultivars and under dif-
              ferent environmental regimes so as to allow the identification of the underlying genet-
              ic and epigenetic factors and their interplay. This will affect the improvement of agro-
              nomical and industrial traits of one of the world’s most important crops and contribute
              to global food security.
              Materials and methods
              Plant material and transcriptome sequencing
              Grains of bread wheat cultivar Chinese Spring were of the same origin as those used
              for generating the reference genome sequence (6). Plants were grown in two phytotron
              chambers, and grains were harvested at 10, 20, and 30 DPA and hand-dissected into
              individual cell types. RNA was isolated and prepared for RNA-seq by using paired-end
              libraries with 200–base pair inserts for 30 samples with four biological replicates per
              cell type and time point (two replicates per room) and two additional technical repli-
              cates. Libraries were sequenced with Illumina HiSeq. 2000 (Illumina, San Diego, Cali-
              fornia).
              Gene annotation, RNA-seq mapping, and expression proXling
              RNA-seq reads were aligned against the repeat-masked chromosome-sorted sequence
              (CSS) sequence assembly (6) with Bowtie2 (35) and Tophat2 (36). Returned alignments
              were stringently filtered so as to remove ambiguously mapped reads and read pairs
              with conflicting alignments. The transcriptome information was used to refine the
              IWGSC reference gene annotation and to identify endosperm-specific genes and alter-
              native splicing transcripts following the procedure of (6) and using a reference-guided
              gene assembly with Cufflinks (37). Gene expression and tests for differentially ex-
              pressed genes were computed on RNA-seq data by using CuffDiff 2 (38), and expres-
              sion levels were log2(FPKM+1)–transformed. To exclude small gene fragments and
              pseudogenes, further statistical analysis was constrained on HC bread wheat genes of
              the class levels HC1 to HC3 (6). Reproducibility of expression measurements were
              evaluated based on Pearson’s correlation of gene expression between biological and
              technical replicates. The accuracy of computed expression levels was elucidated by
              means of an in silico simulation of an RNA-seq experiment of comparable size. Hierar-
              chical clustering of gene expression was performed based on Pearson’s correlation dis-
              tance and average linkage method Preferentially expressed genes were defined by
              comparing the 95% confidence interval of gene expression and significance tests of
              differential gene expression (false discovery rate–adjusted P < 0.05) between groups of
              samples.
              IdentiXcation of homeologous gene triplets and duplets
              Homeologous gene triplets were defined by the protein sequence homology between
              the predicted protein sequences of genes from the A, B, and D genomes [Basic Local
              Alignment Search Tool, Protein (BLASTP), e value ≤ 10−5, alignment identity ≥90%], re-
              quiring strictly persistent best-bidirectional hits in all pairwise combinations. Homeol-
              ogous duplets (one gene copy is absent in one genome) were determined from a global
              OrthoMCL (39) gene family clustering of individual wheat genomes and A. thaliana
              (40) and Ae. tauschii (41).
              IdentiXcation of co-expression clusters and analysis of homeologous genes sub-
              functionalization
              k-means clustering was performed by using Pearson’s correlation distance on log2-
              transformed gene expression levels to group genes that showed similar spatiotemporal
              expression profiles. Different values for k were validated, and k = 10 was selected as the
              most appropriate cluster number according to highest overall Silhouette coefficient.
              Thereby, all co-expression clusters with instable gene-to-cluster assignments and neg-
              ative Silhouette coefficients were combined to a “zero” cluster. The distribution of
              homeologous genes among the co-expression clusters was evaluated and tested for a
              significant number of transitions of homeologs between co-expression clusters by us-
              ing a one-sided Fisher’s exact test (Bonferroni corrected P < 0.05).
              Analysis of single-copy homeologous genes
              For identifying homeologous genes that were significantly differentially expressed be-
              tween the genomes, we performed a permutation test (1000 iterations) for each condi-
              tion and genome pairing. To analyze the expression of strict single-copy homeologous
              genes, expression values from the A, B, and D genomes were concatenated into a
              triplet expression matrix. A co-expression network was then inferred by using the
              Weighted Correlation Network Analysis (WGCNA) approach (42), and network modules
              were defined accordingly (43). Module-related genome dominance and cell type– and
              stage-specific expression were assessed by use of the presence of differentially ex-
              pressed homeologs, module-wise gene expression profiles, and correlation of module
              eigengenes to predefined spatiotemporal expression patterns. We performed function-
              al analysis for individual modules using the GO terms inferred from the bread wheat
              gene annotation (6) and hypergeometric tests as implemented in the GOstats package
              (P < 0.05) (44). These enrichments were summarized and visualized with the REVIGO
              Web server, which arranges semantically similar GO terms in a two-dimensional space
              (16). For each genome, we colored those terms, which were significantly enriched in
              the respective genome-dominated co-expression modules, according to the enrich-
              ment tests (P values). For sequence-divergence analysis of homeologous genes, we es-
              timated the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (KS) and the
              number of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site (KA) based on the
              pairwise best-scoring protein alignments (BLASTP) (45) using the yn00 module of the
 PAML 4 suite (46).
Gene expression along the Triticeae prototype
The strong conservation of synteny between grass genomes and the availability of
high-quality grass genomes allowed for an approximation of linear gene order. To po-
sition the A, B, and D genes in a common sequential order, they were mapped onto
seven chromosome scaffolds named the Triticeae prototype chromosomes. These arti-
ficial scaffolds were generated by integrating syntenic genes from Brachypodium (47),
rice (48), and sorghum (49) by using gene order information from barley (50). Bread
wheat genes were anchored on the scaffolds by using BLASTP and a first best-hit crite-
rion. Gene expression distribution along the chromosomes was analyzed by use of a
sliding window approach and median gene expression.
IdentiXcation and analysis of wheat grain-quality genes
Grain-quality genes were identified by use of orthologous genes from Ae. tauschii (41)
and publically available wheat sequence information deposited at the National Center
for Biotechnology Information. The corresponding genes within the bread wheat
genome and gene annotation were defined with BLAST (45) and GenomeThreader (51)
sequence homology searches as well as OrthoMCL gene family clustering (39). On the
basis of this collective evidence and considering the RNA-seq alignment information,
the candidate loci were manually refined. Gene expression for these genes was quanti-
fied as reads per kilobase per million (RPKM) (52) using HTSeq (www-huber.em-
bl.de/users/anders/HTSeq) and custom python scripts. Phylogenetic trees were in-
ferred by using multiple protein sequence alignments (CLUSTALW algorithm) (53), a
neighborhood-joining algorithm, and the average percentage identity method. Circo-
letto (54) was used for comparative analysis of bread wheat genome sequences with
known gliadin query proteins.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by research grant 199387 from the Norwegian Research
Council to the Norwegian University of Life Sciences and Graminor AS to O.A.O.
K.F.X.M. acknowledges generous funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) to project SFB924 “Molecular mechanisms regulating yield and yield stability in
plants,” the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in frame of
the Synbreed project, and the European Commission’s 7th Framework Program in
frame of the TransPLANT project. The data reported in this paper are tabulated in the
supplementary materials and archived at the ArrayExpress database www.ebi.ac.uk/ar-
rayexpress, accession no. E-MTAB-2137. No conflict of interest is known for the au-
thors of this manuscript regarding data reported herein. S. I. Chi, E. I. Ako, A. Mahara-
jan, and Ø. Jørgensen are thankfully acknowledged for grain dissection and plant culti-
vation. We thank P. Langridge, P. Shewry, B. Keller, and two anonymous reviewers for
helpful suggestions on the manuscript. The RNA-seq was carried out at the Norwegian
Sequencing Centre of University of Oslo. Graminor AS is acknowledged for generous
support throughout this work.
Supplementary Material
Summary
Materials and Methods
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S25
Tables S1 to S31
References (55–69)
IWGSC Author List
Resources
File (pfeifer-sm-tables-s1-s4.xlsx)
    DOWNLOAD
File (pfeifer-sm.pdf)
    DOWNLOAD
References and Notes
  1     Feldman M., Levy A. A., Fahima T., Korol A., Genomic asymmetry in allopolyploid plants: Wheat as a
        model. J. Exp. Bot. 63, 5045–5059 (2012).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
  2     Akhunova A. R., Matniyazov R. T., Liang H., Akhunov E. D., Homoeolog-specific transcriptional bias in
        allopolyploid wheat. BMC Genomics 11, 505 (2010).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
  3     Pellny T. K., Lovegrove A., Freeman J., Tosi P., Love C. G., Knox J. P., Shewry P. R., Mitchell R. A., Cell walls
        of developing wheat starchy endosperm: Comparison of composition and RNA-Seq transcriptome. Plant
        Physiol. 158, 612–627 (2012).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
  4     Gillies S. A., Futardo A., Henry R. J., Gene expression in the developing aleurone and starchy endosperm
        of wheat. Plant Biotechnol. J. 10, 668–679 (2012).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
  5     Drea S., Leader D. J., Arnold B. C., Shaw P., Dolan L., Doonan J. H., Systematic spatial analysis of gene ex-
        pression during wheat caryopsis development. Plant Cell 17, 2172–2185 (2005).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
  6     International Wheat Genome Sequencing Consortium, A chromosome-based draft sequence of the hexa-
        ploid bread wheat genome. Science 345, 1251788 (2014).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
  7     Materials and methods are available as supplementary materials on Science Online.
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES
  8     Belmonte M. F., Kirkbride R. C., Stone S. L., Pelletier J. M., Bui A. Q., Yeung E. C., Hashimoto M., Fei J.,
        Harada C. M., Munoz M. D., Le B. H., Drews G. N., Brady S. M., Goldberg R. B., Harada J. J., Comprehensive
        developmental profiles of gene activity in regions and subregions of the Arabidopsis seed. Proc. Natl.
        Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, E435–E444 (2013).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
  9     Sreenivasulu N., Usadel B., Winter A., Radchuk V., Scholz U., Stein N., Weschke W., Strickert M., Close T.
        J., Stitt M., Graner A., Wobus U., Barley grain maturation and germination: Metabolic pathway and regu-
        latory network commonalities and differences highlighted by new MapMan/PageMan profiling tools.
        Plant Physiol. 146, 1738–1758 (2008).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 10     Ashburner M., Ball C. A., Blake J. A., Botstein D., Butler H., Cherry J. M., Davis A. P., Dolinski K., Dwight S.
        S., Eppig J. T., Harris M. A., Hill D. P., Issel-Tarver L., Kasarskis A., Lewis S., Matese J. C., Richardson J. E.,
        Ringwald M., Rubin G. M., Sherlock G.The Gene Ontology Consortium, Gene ontology: Tool for the unifi-
        cation of biology. Nat. Genet. 25, 25–29 (2000).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 11     Vensel W. H., Tanaka C. K., Cai N., Wong J. H., Buchanan B. B., Hurkman W. J., Developmental changes in
        the metabolic protein profiles of wheat endosperm. Proteomics 5, 1594–1611 (2005).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 12     Serna A., Maitz M., O’Connell T., Santandrea G., Thevissen K., Tienens K., Hueros G., Faleri C., Cai G.,
        Lottspeich F., Thompson R. D., Maize endosperm secretes a novel antifungal protein into adjacent mater-
        nal tissue. Plant J. 25, 687–698 (2001).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 13     Olsen O. A., Nuclear endosperm development in cereals and Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 16, S214–
        S227 (2004).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 14     Shewry P. R., Halford N. G., Cereal seed storage proteins: Structures, properties and role in grain utiliza-
        tion. J. Exp. Bot. 53, 947–958 (2002).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 15     Horvath S., Dong J., Geometric interpretation of gene coexpression network analysis. PLOS Comput. Biol.
        4, e1000117 (2008).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 16     Supek F., Bošnjak M., Škunca N., Šmuc T., REVIGO summarizes and visualizes long lists of gene ontology
        terms. PLOS ONE 6, e21800 (2011).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 17     Marcussen T., et al., Ancient hybridizations among the ancestral genomes of bread wheat. Science 245,
        1250092 (2014).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  ISI  • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 18     Comai L., The advantages and disadvantages of being polyploid. Nat. Rev. Genet. 6, 836–846 (2005).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 19     Shitsukawa N., Tahira C., Kassai K., Hirabayashi C., Shimizu T., Takumi S., Mochida K., Kawaura K., Ogi-
        hara Y., Murai K., Genetic and epigenetic alteration among three homoeologous genes of a class E MADS
        box gene in hexaploid wheat. Plant Cell 19, 1723–1737 (2007).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 20     Hu Z., Han Z., Song N., Chai L., Yao Y., Peng H., Ni Z., Sun Q., Epigenetic modification contributes to the
        expression divergence of three TaEXPA1 homoeologs in hexaploid wheat (Triticum aestivum). New Phytol.
        197, 1344–1352 (2013).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 21     Finnegan E. J., Sheldon C. C., Jardinaud F., Peacock W. J., Dennis E. S., A cluster of Arabidopsis genes with
        a coordinate response to an environmental stimulus. Curr. Biol. 14, 911–916 (2004).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 22     Moore G., Foote T., Helentjaris T., Devos K., Kurata N., Gale M., Was there a single ancestral cereal chro-
        mosome? Trends Genet. 11, 81–82 (1995).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 23     Bolot S., Abrouk M., Masood-Quraishi U., Stein N., Messing J., Feuillet C., Salse J., The ‘inner circle’ of the
        cereal genomes. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 12, 119–125 (2009).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 24     Nakabayashi K., Okamoto M., Koshiba T., Kamiya Y., Nambara E., Genome-wide profiling of stored mRNA
        in Arabidopsis thaliana seed germination: Epigenetic and genetic regulation of transcription in seed.
        Plant J. 41, 697–709 (2005).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 25     Rustenholz C., Choulet F., Laugier C., Safár J., Simková H., Dolezel J., Magni F., Scalabrin S., Cattonaro F.,
        Vautrin S., Bellec A., Bergès H., Feuillet C., Paux E., A 3,000-loci transcription map of chromosome 3B
        unravels the structural and functional features of gene islands in hexaploid wheat. Plant Physiol. 157,
        1596–1608 (2011).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 26     Morris C. F., Puroindolines: The molecular genetic basis of wheat grain hardness. Plant Mol. Biol. 48, 633–
        647 (2002).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 27     Ravel C., Martre P., Romeuf I., Dardevet M., El-Malki R., Bordes J., Duchateau N., Brunel D., Balfourier F.,
        Charmet G., Nucleotide polymorphism in the wheat transcriptional activator Spa influences its pattern of
        expression and has pleiotropic effects on grain protein composition, dough viscoelasticity, and grain
        hardness. Plant Physiol. 151, 2133–2144 (2009).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 28     Payne P., Lawrence G., Catalogue of alleles for the complex gene loci, Glu-A1, Glu-B1, and Glu-D1 which
        code for high-molecular-weight subunits of glutenin in hexaploid wheat. Cereal Res. Commun. 11, 29–35
        (1983).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 29     Thompson R. D., Bartels D., Harberd N. P., Flavell R. B., Characterization of the multigene family coding
        for HMW glutenin subunits in wheat using cDNA clones. Theor. Appl. Genet. 67, 87–96 (1983).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 30     Chantret N., Salse J., Sabot F., Rahman S., Bellec A., Laubin B., Dubois I., Dossat C., Sourdille P., Joudrier
        P., Gautier M. F., Cattolico L., Beckert M., Aubourg S., Weissenbach J., Caboche M., Bernard M., Leroy P.,
        Chalhoub B., Molecular basis of evolutionary events that shaped the hardness locus in diploid and poly-
        ploid wheat species (Triticum and Aegilops). Plant Cell 17, 1033–1045 (2005).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 31     Wilkinson M., Wan Y., Tosi P., Leverington M., Snape J., Mitchell R. A. C., Shewry P. R., Identification and
        genetic mapping of variant forms of puroindoline b expressed in developing wheat grain. J. Cereal Sci. 48,
        722–728 (2008).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  ISI  • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 32     Dupont F. M., Vensel W. H., Tanaka C. K., Hurkman W. J., Altenbach S. B., Deciphering the complexities of
        the wheat flour proteome using quantitative two-dimensional electrophoresis, three proteases and tan-
        dem mass spectrometry. Proteome Sci. 9, 10 (2011).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 33     Anderson O. D., Huo N., Gu Y. Q., The gene space in wheat: The complete γ-gliadin gene family from the
        wheat cultivar Chinese Spring. Funct. Integr. Genomics 13, 261–273 (2013).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 34     Anderson O. D., Gu Y. Q., Kong X., Lazo G. R., Wu J., The wheat omega-gliadin genes: Structure and EST
        analysis. Funct. Integr. Genomics 9, 397–410 (2009).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 35     Langmead B., Trapnell C., Pop M., Salzberg S. L., Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short DNA
        sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 10, R25 (2009).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 36     Trapnell C., Pachter L., Salzberg S. L., TopHat: Discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics
        25, 1105–1111 (2009).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 37     Trapnell C., Williams B. A., Pertea G., Mortazavi A., Kwan G., van Baren M. J., Salzberg S. L., Wold B. J.,
        Pachter L., Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and iso-
        form switching during cell differentiation. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 511–515 (2010).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 38     Trapnell C., Hendrickson D. G., Sauvageau M., Goff L., Rinn J. L., Pachter L., Differential analysis of gene
        regulation at transcript resolution with RNA-seq. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 46–53 (2013).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 39     Li L., Stoeckert C. J., Roos D. S., OrthoMCL: Identification of ortholog groups for eukaryotic genomes.
        Genome Res. 13, 2178–2189 (2003).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 40     The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative, Analysis of the genome sequence of the flowering plant Arabidopsis
        thaliana. Nature 408, 796–815 (2000).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 41     Jia J., Zhao S., Kong X., Li Y., Zhao G., He W., Appels R., Pfeifer M., Tao Y., Zhang X., Jing R., Zhang C., Ma
        Y., Gao L., Gao C., Spannagl M., Mayer K. F., Li D., Pan S., Zheng F., Hu Q., Xia X., Li J., Liang Q., Chen J.,
        Wicker T., Gou C., Kuang H., He G., Luo Y., Keller B., Xia Q., Lu P., Wang J., Zou H., Zhang R., Xu J., Gao J.,
        Middleton C., Quan Z., Liu G., Wang J., Yang H., Liu X., He Z., Mao L., Wang J., Aegilops tauschii draft
        genome sequence reveals a gene repertoire for wheat adaptation. Nature 496, 91–95 (2013).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 42     Langfelder P., Horvath S., WGCNA: An R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioin-
        formatics 9, 559 (2008).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 43     Langfelder P., Zhang B., Horvath S., Defining clusters from a hierarchical cluster tree: The Dynamic Tree
        Cut package for R. Bioinformatics 24, 719–720 (2008).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 44     Falcon S., Gentleman R., Using GOstats to test gene lists for GO term association. Bioinformatics 23, 257–
        258 (2007).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 45     Altschul S. F., Gish W., Miller W., Myers E. W., Lipman D. J., Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol.
        215, 403–410 (1990).
          2 SEE ALL REFERENCES      •  CROSSREF   •   PUBMED •   ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 46     Yang Z., PAML 4: Phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol. Biol. Evol. 24, 1586–1591 (2007).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 47     International Brachypodium Initiative, Genome sequencing and analysis of the model grass Brachypodi-
        um distachyon. Nature 463, 763–768 (2010).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 48     International Rice Genome Sequencing Project, The map-based sequence of the rice genome. Nature 436,
        793–800 (2005).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 49     Paterson A. H., Bowers J. E., Bruggmann R., Dubchak I., Grimwood J., Gundlach H., Haberer G., Hellsten
        U., Mitros T., Poliakov A., Schmutz J., Spannagl M., Tang H., Wang X., Wicker T., Bharti A. K., Chapman J.,
        Feltus F. A., Gowik U., Grigoriev I. V., Lyons E., Maher C. A., Martis M., Narechania A., Otillar R. P., Pen-
        ning B. W., Salamov A. A., Wang Y., Zhang L., Carpita N. C., Freeling M., Gingle A. R., Hash C. T., Keller B.,
        Klein P., Kresovich S., McCann M. C., Ming R., Peterson D. G., Mehboob-ur-Rahman D., Ware P., Westhoff
        K. F., Mayer J., Messing D. S., Rokhsar, The Sorghum bicolor genome and the diversification of grasses.
        Nature 457, 551–556 (2009).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 50     Mayer K. F., Martis M., Hedley P. E., Simková H., Liu H., Morris J. A., Steuernagel B., Taudien S., Roessner
        S., Gundlach H., Kubaláková M., Suchánková P., Murat F., Felder M., Nussbaumer T., Graner A., Salse J.,
        Endo T., Sakai H., Tanaka T., Itoh T., Sato K., Platzer M., Matsumoto T., Scholz U., Dolezel J., Waugh R.,
        Stein N., Unlocking the barley genome by chromosomal and comparative genomics. Plant Cell 23, 1249–
        1263 (2011).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 51     Gremme G., Brendel V., Sparks M. E., Kurtz S., Engineering a software tool for gene structure prediction
        in higher organisms. Inf. Softw. Technol. 47, 965–978 (2005).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  ISI  • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 52     Mortazavi A., Williams B. A., McCue K., Schaeffer L., Wold B., Mapping and quantifying mammalian tran-
        scriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat. Methods 5, 621–628 (2008).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 53     Larkin M. A., Blackshields G., Brown N. P., Chenna R., McGettigan P. A., McWilliam H., Valentin F., Wal-
        lace I. M., Wilm A., Lopez R., Thompson J. D., Gibson T. J., Higgins D. G., Clustal W and Clustal X version
        2.0. Bioinformatics 23, 2947–2948 (2007).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 54     Darzentas N., Circoletto: Visualizing sequence similarity with Circos. Bioinformatics 26, 2620–2621
        (2010).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 55     Min X. J., Butler G., Storms R., Tsang A., OrfPredictor: Predicting protein-coding regions in EST-derived
        sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 33 (Web Server), W677–W680 (2005).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 56     Schnable P. S., Ware D., Fulton R. S., Stein J. C., Wei F., Pasternak S., Liang C., Zhang J., Fulton L., Graves
        T. A., Minx P., Reily A. D., Courtney L., Kruchowski S. S., Tomlinson C., Strong C., Delehaunty K., Fronick
        C., Courtney B., Rock S. M., Belter E., Du F., Kim K., Abbott R. M., Cotton M., Levy A., Marchetto P., Ochoa
        K., Jackson S. M., Gillam B., Chen W., Yan L., Higginbotham J., Cardenas M., Waligorski J., Applebaum E.,
        Phelps L., Falcone J., Kanchi K., Thane T., Scimone A., Thane N., Henke J., Wang T., Ruppert J., Shah N.,
        Rotter K., Hodges J., Ingenthron E., Cordes M., Kohlberg S., Sgro J., Delgado B., Mead K., Chinwalla A.,
        Leonard S., Crouse K., Collura K., Kudrna D., Currie J., He R., Angelova A., Rajasekar S., Mueller T., Lomeli
        R., Scara G., Ko A., Delaney K., Wissotski M., Lopez G., Campos D., Braidotti M., Ashley E., Golser W., Kim
        H., Lee S., Lin J., Dujmic Z., Kim W., Talag J., Zuccolo A., Fan C., Sebastian A., Kramer M., Spiegel L.,
        Nascimento L., Zutavern T., Miller B., Ambroise C., Muller S., Spooner W., Narechania A., Ren L., Wei S.,
        Kumari S., Faga B., Levy M. J., McMahan L., Van Buren P., Vaughn M. W., Ying K., Yeh C. T., Emrich S. J., Jia
        Y., Kalyanaraman A., Hsia A. P., Barbazuk W. B., Baucom R. S., Brutnell T. P., Carpita N. C., Chaparro C.,
        Chia J. M., Deragon J. M., Estill J. C., Fu Y., Jeddeloh J. A., Han Y., Lee H., Li P., Lisch D. R., Liu S., Liu Z.,
        Nagel D. H., McCann M. C., SanMiguel P., Myers A. M., Nettleton D., Nguyen J., Penning B. W., Ponnala L.,
        Schneider K. L., Schwartz D. C., Sharma A., Soderlund C., Springer N. M., Sun Q., Wang H., Waterman M.,
        Westerman R., Wolfgruber T. K., Yang L., Yu Y., Zhang L., Zhou S., Zhu Q., Bennetzen J. L., Dawe R. K.,
        Jiang J., Jiang N., Presting G. G., Wessler S. R., Aluru S., Martienssen R. A., Clifton S. W., McCombie W. R.,
        Wing R. A., Wilson R. K., The B73 maize genome: Complexity, diversity, and dynamics. Science 326, 1112–
        1115 (2009).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 57     Tatusov R. L., Koonin E. V., Lipman D. J., A genomic perspective on protein families. Science 278, 631–637
        (1997).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 58     Binsl T. W., Mullen K. M., van Stokkum I. H., Heringa J., van Beek J., FluxSimulator: An R package to simu-
        late isotopomer distributions in metabolic networks. J. Stat. Softw. 18, 1–18 (2007).
        CROSSREF    • ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 59     Suzuki R., Shimodaira H., Pvclust: An R package for assessing the uncertainty in hierarchical clustering.
        Bioinformatics 22, 1540–1542 (2006).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 60     Rousseeuw P. J., Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. J.
        Comput. Appl. Math. 20, 53–65 (1987).
        CROSSREF    • ISI • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 61     Yip A. M., Horvath S., Gene network interconnectedness and the generalized topological overlap mea-
        sure. BMC Bioinformatics 8, 22 (2007).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 62     Shannon P., Markiel A., Ozier O., Baliga N. S., Wang J. T., Ramage D., Amin N., Schwikowski B., Ideker T.,
        Cytoscape: A software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome
        Res. 13, 2498–2504 (2003).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 63     Csardi G., Nepusz T., The igraph software package for complex network research. InterJournal Complex
        Systems 1695, 1695 (2006).
        GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 64     Mayer K. F., Taudien S., Martis M., Simková H., Suchánková P., Gundlach H., Wicker T., Petzold A., Felder
        M., Steuernagel B., Scholz U., Graner A., Platzer M., Dolezel J., Stein N., Gene content and virtual gene
        order of barley chromosome 1H. Plant Physiol. 151, 496–505 (2009).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 65     Salse J., Bolot S., Throude M., Jouffe V., Piegu B., Quraishi U. M., Calcagno T., Cooke R., Delseny M., Feuil-
        let C., Identification and characterization of shared duplications between rice and wheat provide new in-
        sight into grass genome evolution. Plant Cell 20, 11–24 (2008).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 66     Hernandez P., Martis M., Dorado G., Pfeifer M., Gálvez S., Schaaf S., Jouve N., Šimková H., Valárik M.,
        Doležel J., Mayer K. F., Next-generation sequencing and syntenic integration of flow-sorted arms of
        wheat chromosome 4A exposes the chromosome structure and gene content. Plant J. 69, 377–386 (2012).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 67     Miftahudin K., Ross K., Ma X. F., Mahmoud A. A., Layton J., Milla M. A., Chikmawati T., Ramalingam J.,
        Feril O., Pathan M. S., Momirovic G. S., Kim S., Chema K., Fang P., Haule L., Struxness H., Birkes J.,
        Yaghoubian C., Skinner R., McAllister J., Nguyen V., Qi L. L., Echalier B., Gill B. S., Linkiewicz A. M., Dub-
        covsky J., Akhunov E. D., Dvorák J., Dilbirligi M., Gill K. S., Peng J. H., Lapitan N. L., Bermudez-Kandianis
        C. E., Sorrells M. E., Hossain K. G., Kalavacharla V., Kianian S. F., Lazo G. R., Chao S., Anderson O. D., Gon-
        zalez-Hernandez J., Conley E. J., Anderson J. A., Choi D. W., Fenton R. D., Close T. J., McGuire P. E.,
        Qualset C. O., Nguyen H. T., Gustafson J. P., Analysis of expressed sequence tag loci on wheat chromo-
        some group 4. Genetics 168, 651–663 (2004).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 68     Devos K. M., Dubcovsky J., Dvořák J., Chinoy C. N., Gale M. D., Structural evolution of wheat chromo-
        somes 4A, 5A, and 7B and its impact on recombination. Theor. Appl. Genet. 91, 282–288 (1995).
        CROSSREF    • PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
 69     Waterhouse A. M., Procter J. B., Martin D. M., Clamp M., Barton G. J., Jalview Version 2—A multiple se-
        quence alignment editor and analysis workbench. Bioinformatics 25, 1189–1191 (2009).
          3 GO TO REFERENCE      •  CROSSREF   •  PUBMED   • ISI  •  GOOGLE SCHOLAR
eLetters (0)
eLetters is an online forum for ongoing peer review. Submission of eLetters are open to all.
eLetters are not edited, proofread, or indexed. Please read our Terms of Service before submitting
your own eLetter.
    LOG IN TO SUBMIT A RESPONSE
No eLetters have been published for this article yet.
 Recommended articles from TrendMD
 Shifting the limits in wheat research and breeding                Transcriptome analysis of wheat grain using RNA-
 using a fully annotated reference genome                          Seq
 The International Wheat Genome Sequencing                         Liu WEI et al., Frontiers of Agricultural Science and
 Consortium et al., Science, 2018                                  Engineering, 2014
 Genome mapping of seed-borne allergens and                        Genomic Identification of Low-Density
 immunoresponsive proteins in wheat                                Granulocytes and Analysis of Their Role in the
 Angéla Juhász et al., Sci Adv, 2018                               Pathogenesis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
                                                                   Brian J. Kegerreis et al., J Immunol, 2019
 The transcriptional landscape of polyploid wheat
 R. H. Ramírez-González et al., Science, 2018                      Evidence for Ig Light Chain Isotype Exclusion in
                                                                   Shark B Lymphocytes Suggests Ordered
 Early allopolyploid evolution in the post-Neolithic               Mechanisms
 Brassica napus oilseed genome                                     Anna Iacoangeli et al., J Immunol, 2017
 Boulos Chalhoub et al., Science, 2014
                                                                   The role of genomic structural variation in the
 Genome-Wide Demethylation of Arabidopsis                          genetic improvement of polyploid crops
 Endosperm                                                         Sarah-Veronica Schiessl et al., The Crop Journal,
 Tzung-Fu Hsieh et al., Science, 2009                              2019
                                                                   Exploring the mechanisms behind long noncoding
                                                                   RNAs and cancer
                                                                   Balas et al., Non-coding RNA Research, 2018
Powered by
View Full Text       Download PDF
NEWS                                    CAREERS                                COMMENTARY                           JOURNALS                       AUTHORS & REVIEWERS       FOLLOW US
All News                                Careers Articles                       Opinion                              Science                        Information for Authors
ScienceInsider                          Find Jobs                              Analysis                             Science Advances               Information for Reviewers   4            5           (
News Features                           Employer Prosles                       Blogs                                Science Immunology
Subscribe to News from Science                                                                                      Science Robotics
News from Science FAQ                                                                                               Science Signaling
                                                                                                                                                                               6            7           󡀆
About News from Science                                                                                             Science Translational Medicine
                                                                                                                    Science Partner Journals
LIBRARIANS                              ADVERTISERS                            RELATED SITES                        ABOUT US                       HELP
                                                                                                                                                                             © 2022 American Association
Manage Your Institutional               Advertising Kits                       AAAS.org                             Leadership                     FAQs                      for the Advancement of Science.
Subscription                            Custom Publishing Info                 AAAS Communities                     Work at AAAS                   Access and Subscriptions  All rights reserved. AAAS is a
Library Admin Portal                                                                                                                                                         partner of HINARI, AGORA,
                                        Post a Job                             EurekAlert!                          Prizes and Awards              Order a Single Issue
                                                                                                                                                                             OARE, CHORUS, CLOCKSS,
Request a Quote                                                                Science in the Classroom                                            Reprints and Permissions  CrossRef and COUNTER. Science
Librarian FAQs                                                                                                                                     TOC Alerts and RSS Feeds  ISSN 0036-8075.
                                                                                                                                                   Contact Us
Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | Accessibility
